
## ChannelFHawk
### Fairchild Channel F Core

Authored by Asnivor
Additional (invaluable) help from CasualPokePlayer

This is (I believe) a cycle-accurate implementation of the Fairchild Channel F, a home video game console released in 1976. 
The Channel F was the first programmable ROM cartridge-based console, and the first to use a microprocessor. 
It was designed by Jerry Lawson, who was one of the few African-American engineers in the industry at the time.
The Channel F was not a commercial success, but it was a pioneering system that laid the groundwork for the video game industry as we know it today.

The Fairchild F8 processor is an unusual implementation, consisting of several modular components working together as a single unit.

http://www.bitsavers.org/components/fairchild/f8/F8_prelimUM_Jan75.pdf

The Channel F is essentially a very simple system, with an F8 processor implementation, no traditional RAM (although certain carts have RAM on board and the processor has 64 * 1 byte scratchpad registers that can be used as storage).
Sound is generated by a very simple tone generator circuit (allowing squarewaves at 3 set frequencies to be output) and video is generated by a circuit that reads directly from the onboard VRAM (that can only be written to).


#### BIOS ROMs

BIOS files are not included with Bizhawk, but are required for the system to function.

| Emulated System | Required Files | MD5 Hash | SHA-1 Hash |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Channel F | sl131253.bin | AC9804D4C0E9D07E33472E3726ED15C3 | 81193965A374D77B99B4743D317824B53C3E3C78 |
| Channel F | sl131254.bin | DA98F4BB3242AB80D76629021BB27585 | 8F70D1B74483BA3A37E86CF16C849D601A8C3D2C |
| --- | --- | --- | --- |
| Channel F II | sl90025.bin | 95D339631D867C8F1D15A5F2EC26069D | 759E2ED31FBDE4A2D8DAF8B9F3E0DFFEBC90DAE2 |
| Channel F II | sl131254.bin | DA98F4BB3242AB80D76629021BB27585 | 8F70D1B74483BA3A37E86CF16C849D601A8C3D2C |

The model of console (Channel F or Channel F II) along with region (NTSC/PAL) can be selected via the core SyncSettings menu.
All games are compatible with both models and both regions (and all clones).


#### Titles

There are limited titles available for the system, but there are some more recent homebrew games that stretch the system in some interesting ways.

The latest supported ROM list can always be found here:
https://github.com/TASEmulators/BizHawk/blob/master/Assets/gamedb/gamedb_channelf.txt

The console comes with two built-in games, Hockey and Tennis.
Due to the ROM-first nature of Bizhawk, the core has been set up to load the onboard games if any of the BIOS files above are supplied as a game ROM.

-Asnivor
2024
