.TH "mupen64plus" 6
.SH NAME
mupen64plus \- Console front\(hyend for the Mupen64Plus N64 emulator
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B mupen64plus
[parameters(s)] [romfile]
.SH DESCRIPTION
Mupen64Plus is a plugin\(hybased N64 emulator for Linux/Unix, OSX, and Windows which is capable of accurately playing many games.
Included are four MIPS R4300 CPU emulators, with dynamic recompilers for 32\(hybit x86 and 64\(hybit amd64 systems, and necessary plugins for audio, graphical rendering (RDP), signal co\(hyprocessor (RSP), and input.
There are currently two OpenGL video plugins available: the included Rice Video, and Arachnoid (at http://bitbucket.org/wahrhaft/mupen64plus\-video\-arachnoid/).

The most current documentation can be found at the project's homepage:

http://code.google.com/p/mupen64plus
.TP
.B \-h, \-\-help
Print help message.
.TP
.B \-\-noosd
Disable onscreen display.
.TP
.B \-\-osd
Enable onscreen display.
.TP
.B \-\-fullscreen
Run emulator in fullscreen display mode.
.TP
.B \-\-windowed
Run emulator in windowed display mode.
.TP
.B \-\-resolution \fRres
Display resolution (640\(mu480, 800\(mu600, 1024\(mu768, etc)
.TP
.B \-\-cheats \fRcheat\(hyspec
Enable or list cheat codes for the given rom file.
.TP
.B \-\-corelib \fRfilepath
Specifies a filename (optionally with a preceding directory path) to load a specific Mupen64Plus core library.
.TP
.B \-\-configdir \fRdirectory
Specifies a directory to look for the mupen64plus.cfg file.
Default is \fI~/.config/mupen64plus/\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-datadir \fRdirectory
Specifies a directory to search for shared data files (fonts, cheat codes, .ini files).
Default is \fIPREFIX/share/mupen64plus/\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-plugindir \fRdirectory
Specifies a directory to search for plugin files.
Default is \fIPREFIX/lib/mupen64plus/\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-sshotdir \fRdirectory
Specifies a directory to save screenshots captured during gameplay.
Default is \fI~/.local/share/mupen64plus/screenshot/\fR.
.TP
.B \-\-gfx \fRplugin\(hyspec
Specifies a \fIplugin\(hyspec\fR to select a graphics plugin for use during emulation.
.TP
.B \-\-audio \fRplugin\(hyspec
Specifies a \fIplugin\(hyspec\fR to select an audio plugin for use during emulation.
.TP
.B \-\-input \fRplugin\(hyspec
Specifies a \fIplugin\(hyspec\fR to select an input plugin for use during emulation.
.TP
.B \-\-rsp \fRplugin\(hyspec
Specifies a \fIplugin\(hyspec\fR to select an RSP plugin for use during emulation.
.TP
.B \-\-emumode \fRmode
Specifies which mode the emulator core should run in.
\fImode\fR should be set to one of the following numbers: 0=Pure Interpreter, 1=Cached Interpreter, 2=Dynamic Recompiler (DynaRec).
.TP
.B \-\-testshots \fRlist
Take screenshots at frames given in the comma\(hyseparated \fIlist\fR, then quit.
.TP
.B \-\-core\-compare\-send
Use the core comparison debugging feature, in data sending mode.
If the core was not compiled with support for the Core Comparison feature, then the emulator will exit with an error.
.TP
.B \-\-core\-compare\-recv
Use the core comparison debugging feature, in data receiving mode.
If the core was not compiled with support for the Core Comparison feature, then the emulator will exit with an error.
.TP
.B \-\-set \fRparam\(hyspec
Set the value of a Mupen64Plus configuration parameter.
This option may be used multiple times.
The format of \fIparam\(hyspec\fR is Section\(hyName[Param\(hyName]=Value
.TP
.B \-\-saveoptions
Save the given command\(hyline options into the mupen64plus configuration file to use as defaults in the future.
Since the console front\(hyend needs to load the core library before reading the configuration file, the \-\-corelib option cannot be saved.
.TP
.B \-\-verbose
Print lots of information.
Useful for debugging but unnecessary for normal use.
.SH plugin\(hyspec
.TP
.B (plugin\-name)
Filename (without path) of plugin to use.
Application will search through several directories to look for a matching plugin name.
.TP
.B (plugin\-path)
Full directory path and filename of plugin.
.TP
.B 'dummy'
Use the dummy plugin.
.SH cheat\(hyspec
.TP
.B 'list'
Show all of the available cheat codes.
.TP
.B 'all'
Enable all of the available cheat codes.
.TP
.B (codelist)
A comma separated list of cheat code numbers to enable.
.SH KEY COMMANDS
The following shortcut keys can be used during emulation.
These are the default key values; nearly all of them may be set to different keys by editing the mupen64plus configuration file.
.TP
.B Escape
Quit the emulator.
.TP
.B 0\-9
Select virtual 'slot' for save/load state.
.TP
.B F5
Save emulator state to current slot.
.TP
.B F7
Load emulator state from current slot.
.TP
.B F9
Reset emulator.
.TP
.B F10
Slow down emulator speed by 5 percent.
.TP
.B F11
Speed up emulator speed by 5 percent.
.TP
.B F12
Take screenshot.
.TP
.B Alt\(hyEnter
Toggle fullscreen mode.
This is not supported on Windows.
.TP
.B p or P
Pause/continue emulation.
.TP
.B m or M
Mute/unmute sound.
.TP
.B f or F
Fast Forward (playback at 250% normal speed as long as key is pressed).
.TP
.B g or G
Press GameShark button (if cheats are enabled).
.TP
.B / or ?
Advance one frame if paused.
.TP
.B [
Decrease volume.
.TP
.B ]
Increase volume.
.SH FILES
The default location for the Mupen64plus configuration file is \fI~/.config/mupen64plus/\fR.
The default location of the saved screenshots is \fI~/.local/share/mupen64plus/screenshot/\fR.
The default location of the save states is \fI~/.local/share/mupen64plus/save/\fR.
.SH BUGS
To report bugs or make feature requests, use the issue tracker on the Mupen64Plus project site:

http://code.google.com/p/mupen64plus/issues/list
.SH AUTHORS
Mupen64Plus was originally started by Richard42 and nmn, and is based on Mupen64 (originally written by Hacktarux).

This man page was written by ebenblues, and updated by Richard42.

.SH COPYRIGHT
Mupen64Plus is \(co 2008\-2010 The Mupen64Plus Team
License GPLv2+: GNU GPL version 2 or later <http://gnu.org/licenses/gpl.html>

This is free software: you are free to change and redistribute it.
There is NO WARRANTY, to the extent permitted by law.


